<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XX: Mrs. Humdrum and Dr. Downie Propose a Compromise, Which, After an Amendment by George, Is Carried Nem. Con.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Humdrum and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Downie Propose a Compromise, Which, After an Amendment by George, Is Carried Nem. Con.</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>They returned in about ten minutes, and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Downie asked <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Humdrum to say what they had agreed to recommend.</p>
			<p>“We think,” said she very demurely, “that the strict course would be to drop the charge of poaching, and Blue-Pool both the Professors and the prisoner without delay.</p>
			<p>“We also think that the proper thing would be to place on record that the prisoner is the Sunchild⁠—about which neither <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Downie nor I have a shadow of doubt.</p>
			<p>“These measures we hold to be the only legal ones, but at the same time we do not recommend them. We think it would offend the public conscience if it came to be known, as it certainly would, that the Sunchild was violently killed, on the very day that had seen us dedicate a temple in his honour, and perhaps at the very hour when laudatory speeches were being made about him at the Mayor’s banquet; we think also that we should strain a good many points rather than Blue-Pool the Professors.</p>
			<p>“Nothing is perfect, and Truth makes her mistakes like other people; when she goes wrong and reduces herself to such an absurdity as she has here done, those who love her must save her from herself, correct her, and rehabilitate her.</p>
			<p>“Our conclusion, therefore, is this:⁠—</p>
			<p>“The prisoner must recant on oath his statement that he is the Sunchild. The interpreter must be squared, or convinced of his mistake. The Mayoress, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Downie, I, and the gaoler (with the interpreter if we can manage him), must depose on oath that the prisoner is not Higgs. This must be our contribution to the rehabilitation of Truth.</p>
			<p>“The Professors must contribute as follows: They must swear that the prisoner is not the man they met with quails in his possession on Thursday night. They must further swear that they have one or both of them known him, off and on, for many years past, as a monomaniac with Sunchildism on the brain but otherwise harmless. If they will do this, no proceedings are to be taken against them.</p>
			<p>“The Mayor’s contribution shall be to reprimand the prisoner, and order him to repeat his recantation in the new temple before the Manager and Head Cashier, and to confirm his statement on oath by kissing the reliquary containing the newly found relic.</p>
			<p>“The Ranger and the Master of the Gaol must contribute that the prisoner’s measurements, and the marks found on his body, negative all possibility of his identity with the Sunchild, and that all the hair on the covered as well as the uncovered parts of his body was found to be jet black.</p>
			<p>“We advise further that the prisoner should have his nuggets and his kit returned to him, and that the receipt given by the Professors together with Professor Hanky’s handkerchief be given back to the Professors.</p>
			<p>“Furthermore, seeing that we should all of us like to have a quiet evening with the prisoner, we should petition the Mayor and Mayoress to ask him to meet all here present at dinner tomorrow evening, after his discharge, on the plea that Professors Hanky and Panky and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Downie may give him counsel, convince him of his folly, and if possible free him henceforth from the monomania under which he now suffers.</p>
			<p>“The prisoner shall give his word of honour, never to return to Erewhon, nor to encourage any of his countrymen to do so. After the dinner to which we hope the Mayoress Will invite us, the Ranger, if the night is fair, shall escort the prisoner as far as the statues, whence he will find his own way home.</p>
			<p>“Those who are in favour of this compromise hold up their hands.”</p>
			<p>The Mayor and Yram held up theirs. “Will you hold up yours, Professor Hanky,” said George, “if I release you?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Hanky with a gruff laugh, whereon George released him and he held up both his hands.</p>
			<p>Panky did not hold up his, whereon Hanky said, “Hold up your hands, Panky, can’t you? We are really very well out of it.”</p>
			<p>Panky, hardly lifting his head, sobbed out, “I think we ought to have our f-f-fo-fo-four pounds ten returned to us.”</p>
			<p>“I am afraid, sir,” said George, “that the prisoner must have spent the greater part of this money.”</p>
			<p>Everyone smiled, indeed it was all George could do to prevent himself from laughing outright. The Mayor brought out his purse, counted the money, and handed it good-humouredly to Panky, who gratefully received it, and said he would divide it with Hanky. He then held up his hands, “But,” he added, turning to his brother Professor, “so long as I live, Hanky, I will never go out anywhere again with you.”</p>
			<p>George then turned to Hanky and said, “I am afraid I must now trouble you and Professor Panky to depose on oath to the facts which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Humdrum and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Downie propose you should swear to in open court tomorrow. I knew you would do so, and have brought an ordinary form, duly filled up, which declares that the prisoner is not the poacher you met on Thursday; and also, that he has been long known to both of you as a harmless monomaniac.”</p>
			<p>As he spoke he brought out depositions to the above effect which he had just written in his office; he showed the Professors that the form was this time an innocent one, whereon they made no demur to signing and swearing in the presence of the Mayor, who attested.</p>
			<p>“The former depositions,” said Hanky, “had better be destroyed at once.”</p>
			<p>“That,” said George, “may hardly be, but so long as you stick to what you have just sworn to, they will not be used against you.”</p>
			<p>Hanky scowled, but knew that he was powerless and said no more.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The knowledge of what ensued did not reach me from my father. George and his mother, seeing how ill he looked, and what a shock the events of the last few days had given him, resolved that he should not know of the risk that George was about to run; they therefore said nothing to him about it. What I shall now tell, I learned on the occasion already referred to when I had the happiness to meet George. I am in some doubt whether it is more fitly told here, or when I come to the interview between him and me; on the whole, however, I suppose chronological order is least outraged by dealing with it here.</p>
			<p>As soon as the Professors had signed the second depositions, George said, “I have not yet held up my hands, but I will hold them up if <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Humdrum and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Downie will approve of what I propose. Their compromise does not go far enough, for swear as we may, it is sure to get noised abroad, with the usual exaggerations, that the Sunchild has been here, and that he has been spirited away either by us, or by the sun his father. For one person whom we know of as having identified him, there will be five, of whom we know nothing, and whom we cannot square. Reports will reach the King sooner or later, and I shall be sent for. Meanwhile the Professors will be living in fear of intrigue on my part, and I, however unreasonably, shall fear the like on theirs. This should not be. I mean, therefore, on the day following my return from escorting the prisoner, to set out for the capital, see the King, and make a clean breast of the whole matter. To this end I must have the nuggets, the prisoner’s kit, his receipt, Professor Hanky’s handkerchief, and, of course, the two depositions just sworn to by the Professors. I hope and think that the King will pardon us all round; but whatever he may do I shall tell him everything.”</p>
			<p>Hanky was up in arms at once. “Sheer madness,” he exclaimed. Yram and the Mayor looked anxious; <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Downie eyed George as though he were some curious creature, which he heard of but had never seen, and was rather disposed to like. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Humdrum nodded her head approvingly.</p>
			<p>“Quite right, George,” said she, “tell his Majesty everything.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Downie then said, “Your son, Mayoress, is a very sensible fellow. I will go with him, and with the Professors⁠—for they had better come too: each will hear what the other says, and we will tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. I am, as you know, a persona grata at Court; I will say that I advised your son’s action. The King has liked him ever since he was a boy, and I am not much afraid about what he will do. In public, no doubt we had better hush things up, but in private the King must be told.”</p>
			<p>Hanky fought hard for some time, but George told him that it did not matter whether he agreed or no. “You can come,” he said, “or stop away, just as you please. If you come, you can hear and speak; if you do not, you will not hear, but these two depositions will speak for you. Please yourself.”</p>
			<p>“Very well,” he said at last, “I suppose we had better go.”</p>
			<p>Everyone having now understood what his or her part was to be, Yram said they had better shake hands all round and take a couple of hours’ rest before getting ready for the banquet. George said that the Professors did not shake hands with him very cordially, but the farce was gone through. When the handshaking was over, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Downie and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Humdrum left the house, and the Professors retired grumpily to their own room.</p>
			<p>I will say here that no harm happened either to George or the Professors in consequence of his having told the King, but will reserve particulars for my concluding chapter.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
