<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII: Yram Invites Dr. Downie and Mrs. Humdrum to Luncheon—A Passage at Arms Between Her and Hanky Is Amicably Arranged</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Yram Invites <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Downie and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Humdrum to Luncheon⁠—A Passage at Arms Between Her and Hanky Is Amicably Arranged</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The disturbance caused by my father’s outbreak was quickly suppressed, for George got him out of the temple almost immediately; it was bruited about, however, that the Sunchild had come down from the palace of the sun, but had disappeared as soon as anyone had tried to touch him. In vain did Hanky try to put fresh life into his sermon; its back had been broken, and large numbers left the church to see what they could hear outside, or failing information, to discourse more freely with one another.</p>
			<p>Hanky did his best to quiet his hearers when he found that he could not infuriate them⁠—</p>
			<p>“This poor man,” he said, “is already known to me, as one of those who have deluded themselves into believing that they are the Sunchild. I have known of his so declaring himself, more than once, in the neighbourhood of Bridgeford, and others have not infrequently done the same; I did not at first recognize him, and regret that the shock of horror his words occasioned me should have prompted me to suggest violence against him. Let this unfortunate affair pass from your minds, and let me again urge upon you the claims of the Sunchild Evidence Society.”</p>
			<p>The audience on hearing that they were to be told more about the Sunchild Evidence Society melted away even more rapidly than before, and the sermon fizzled out to an ignominious end quite unworthy of its occasion.</p>
			<p>About half-past twelve, the service ended, and Hanky went to the robing-room to take off his vestments. Yram, the Mayor, and Panky, waited for him at the door opposite to that through which my father had been taken; while waiting, Yram scribbled off two notes in pencil, one to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Downie, and another to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Humdrum, begging them to come to lunch at once⁠—for it would be one o’clock before they could reach the Mayor’s. She gave these notes to the Mayor, and bade him bring both the invited guests along with him.</p>
			<p>The Mayor left just as Hanky was coming towards her. “This, Mayoress,” he said with some asperity, “is a very serious business. It has ruined my collection. Half the people left the temple without giving anything at all. You seem,” he added in a tone the significance of which could not be mistaken, “to be very fond, Mayoress, of this <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Higgs.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Yram, “I am; I always liked him, and I am sorry for him; but he is not the person I am most sorry for at this moment⁠—he, poor man, is not going to be horsewhipped within the next twenty minutes.” And she spoke the “he” in italics.</p>
			<p>“I do not understand you, Mayoress.”</p>
			<p>“My husband will explain, as soon as I have seen him.”</p>
			<p>“Hanky,” said Panky, “you must withdraw, and apologise at once.”</p>
			<p>Hanky was not slow to do this, and when he had disavowed everything, withdrawn everything, apologised for everything, and eaten humble pie to Yram’s satisfaction, she smiled graciously, and held out her hand, which Hanky was obliged to take.</p>
			<p>“And now, Professor,” she said, “let me return to your remark that this is a very serious business, and let me also claim a woman’s privilege of being listened to whenever she chooses to speak. I propose, then, that we say nothing further about this matter till after luncheon. I have asked <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Downie and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Humdrum to join us⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Why <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Humdrum?” interrupted Hanky none too pleasantly, for he was still furious about the duel that had just taken place between himself and his hostess.</p>
			<p>“My dear Professor,” said Yram good-humouredly, “pray say all you have to say and I will continue.”</p>
			<p>Hanky was silent.</p>
			<p>“I have asked,” resumed Yram, “<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Downie and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Humdrum to join, us, and after luncheon we can discuss the situation or no as you may think proper. Till then let us say no more. Luncheon will be over by two o’clock or soon after, and the banquet will not begin till seven, so we shall have plenty of time.”</p>
			<p>Hanky looked black and said nothing. As for Panky he was morally in a state of collapse, and did not count.</p>
			<p>Hardly had they reached the Mayor’s house when the Mayor also arrived with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Downie and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Humdrum, both of whom had seen and recognised my father in spite of his having dyed his hair. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Downie had met him at supper in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thims’s rooms when he had visited Bridgeford, and naturally enough had observed him closely. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Humdrum, as I have already said, had seen him more than once when he was in prison. She and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Downie were talking earnestly over the strange reappearance of one whom they had believed long since dead, but Yram imposed on them the same silence that she had already imposed on the Professors.</p>
			<p>“Professor Hanky,” said she to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Humdrum, in Hanky’s hearing, “is a little alarmed at my having asked you to join our secret conclave. He is not married, and does not know how well a woman can hold her tongue when she chooses. I should have told you all that passed, for I mean to follow your advice, so I thought you had better hear everything yourself.”</p>
			<p>Hanky still looked black, but he said nothing. Luncheon was promptly served, and done justice to in spite of much preoccupation; for if there is one thing that gives a better appetite than another, it is a Sunday morning’s service with a charity sermon to follow. As the guests might not talk on the subject they wanted to talk about, and were in no humour to speak of anything else, they gave their whole attention to the good things that were before them, without so much as a thought about reserving themselves for the evening’s banquet. Nevertheless, when luncheon was over, the Professors were in no more genial, manageable, state of mind than they had been when it began.</p>
			<p>When the servants had left the room, Yram said to Hanky, “You saw the prisoner, and he was the man you met on Thursday night?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly, he was wearing the forbidden dress and he had many quails in his possession. There is no doubt also that he was a foreign devil.”</p>
			<p>At this point, it being now nearly half-past two, George came in, and took a seat next to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Humdrum⁠—between her and his mother⁠—who of course sat at the head of the table with the Mayor opposite to her. On one side of the table sat the Professors, and on the other <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Downie, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Humdrum, and George, who had heard the last few words that Hanky had spoken.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
