<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Author’s Preface</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="preface" epub:type="preface">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Author’s Preface</h2>
			<p>I forget when, but not very long after I had published <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Erewhon</i> in <time>1872</time>, it occurred to me to ask myself what course events in Erewhon would probably take after <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Higgs, as I suppose I may now call him, had made his escape in the balloon with Arowhena. Given a people in the conditions supposed to exist in Erewhon, and given the apparently miraculous ascent of a remarkable stranger into the heavens with an earthly bride⁠—what would be the effect on the people generally?</p>
			<p>There was no use in trying to solve this problem before, say, twenty years should have given time for Erewhonian developments to assume something like permanent shape, and in <time>1892</time> I was too busy with books now published to be able to attend to Erewhon. It was not till the early winter of <time>1900</time>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> as nearly as may be thirty years after the date of Higgs’s escape, that I found time to deal with the question above stated, and to answer it, according to my lights, in the book which I now lay before the public.</p>
			<p>I have concluded, I believe rightly, that the events described in Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span> of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Erewhon</i> would give rise to such a cataclysmic change in the old Erewhonian opinions as would result in the development of a new religion. Now the development of all new religions follows much the same general course. In all cases the times are more or less out of joint⁠—older faiths are losing their hold upon the masses. At such times, let a personality appear, strong in itself, and made to seem still stronger by association with some supposed transcendent miracle, and it will be easy to raise a Lo here! that will attract many followers. If there be a single great, and apparently well-authenticated, miracle, others will accrete round it; then, in all religions that have so originated, there will follow temples, priests, rites, sincere believers, and unscrupulous exploiters of public credulity. To chronicle the events that followed Higgs’s balloon ascent without showing that they were much as they have been under like conditions in other places, would be to hold the mirror up to something very wide of nature.</p>
			<p>Analogy, however, between courses of events is one thing⁠—historic parallelisms abound; analogy between the main actors in events is a very different one, and one, moreover, of which few examples can be found. The development of the new ideas in Erewhon is a familiar one, but there is no more likeness between Higgs and the founder of any other religion, than there is between Jesus Christ and Muhammad. He is a typical middle-class Englishman, deeply tainted with priggishness in his earlier years, but in great part freed from it by the sweet uses of adversity.</p>
			<p>If I may be allowed for a moment to speak about myself, I would say that I have never ceased to profess myself a member of the more advanced wing of the English Broad Church. What those who belong to this wing believe, I believe. What they reject, I reject. No two people think absolutely alike on any subject, but when I converse with advanced Broad Churchmen I find myself in substantial harmony with them. I believe⁠—and should be very sorry if I did not believe⁠—that, mutatis mutandis, such men will find the advice given on <abbr>pp.</abbr> 277⁠–⁠281 and 287⁠–⁠291 of this book much what, under the supposed circumstances, they would themselves give.</p>
			<p>Lastly, I should express my great obligations to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. A.</abbr> Streatfeild of the British Museum, who, in the absence from England of my friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Festing Jones, has kindly supervised the corrections of my book as it passed through the press.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">Samuel Butler.</p>
				<p><time datetime="1901-05-01">May 1, 1901</time>.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
